# Cycle Detection

## Description



## Purpose


## Algorithms
* [Robert Floyd's Tortoise and Hare Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_detection#Floyd's_Tortoise_and_Hare "Floyd's Tortoise and Hare Algorithm")
* [Richard Brent's Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_detection#Brent's_algorithm "Brent's Algorithm")

## Algorithmic Analysis

| Aspect     | Time Complexity | Space Complexity     |
| :----:       |    :----:   |      :---: |
| Build Graph  |    O(n<sup>2</sup>)     | O(n)      |
| Floyd's Algorithm     | O(n)       | O(1)  |
| Brent's Algorithm  |    O(n)     | O(1)      |

## Sources
[Cycle Detection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_detection "Cycle Detection")


## Use
The cycle detection program can be run by first compiling **findCycle.cpp** using the provided **Makefile**, then running `./findCycle -f [node data]` where [node data] is the properly formatted datafile (see **Datafile Information**) specifed by the -f flag.  If the data does not include a repeated value (i.e. all values are unique), the `-l[index]` flag and value is used to set the next value to of the final value of data to be the [index] node of the graph thus creating a loop to a specified location. (Note: There should be no space between the -l flag and [index] as in "-l5" )

This feature is mainly used for algorithm testing purposes as specifying these values makes the output of the program trivial. Failing to specify a -l[index] value of unique data will lead to unpredictable results.

For best use, specify a properly formatted datafile that contains at least one redundant integer.


## Datafile Information
* Datafiles should contain more than one value
* Entries in the datafile should be newline delimited
* Once a redudant value is read in, no more values will be read, and the loop will be simulated
* Datafile entries should be integers.  The Node class handles templated data storage, but the **findCycle** program only demonstrates the detection using integers.


## Example Build
*Datafile (ignoring newline characters): 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 3 4 5 6 3 ...*

This will create a graph where the values appear as the data for each node. Each node points to the the node of the value to its right (e.g. 0 -> 1).  Because the second 3 is redudant, the 6 will point to the first 3, and every value after the 6 will not be read in (they could be generated by the loop).